Today I’m speaking with Ken Rogoff, who
is a professor at Harvard, recent author
of Our Dollar, Your Problem, and
former Chief Economist at the IMF.
Ken, thanks so much for coming on the podcast.
Thanks so much for having me and welcome to
Harvard, which is where we’re filming this.
In your book you have a lot of anecdotes of
meeting different Chinese leaders, especially
when you were Chief Economist at the IMF. It
seems like you had positive experiences. They
would listen. You met the Premier with your
family, and he would listen to your advice.
One, how does that inform your view about how
competent their leadership is? Two, how do you
think they got into this mess, with their big
stimulus or whatever else you think went wrong?
To the extent that when you were talking to
them in the early 2000s, it seemed
like you were seeing eye to eye,
or that they would understand your perspective.
Do you think something changed in the meantime?
First I want to be careful to say
that they listen to everybody.
The Chinese are way better than we are
at hearing a hundred different views.
Mine would be one of many that they heard.
I was very impressed by the competence of the
Chinese leaders. I actually gave a lecture in the
Party’s training school where, if you’re a mayor,
a provincial governor, any bureaucrat on
your way up, you go to this thing which
for them is like Harvard Business School.
They really looked for competence. Of course
there were various loyalty things. But when you
met the leaders—and I met a lot of them when I
was at the school—they actually asked really raw
questions too. They said things I couldn’t believe
they were asking. And I was told that within
the school, you're allowed to say anything.
So they had that system for a long time. When
you met Chinese technocrats—or even the mayor of
Shanghai—they were impressive. I'm not saying ours
aren't, but it's a mix. I think you know that.
I think Xi Jinping has really changed that. He’s
been the president since 2013, and over time he’s
pushed out that system and moved more toward
loyalists, people who are less technocratic.
Probably the most important talk I ever
gave in China was at what's called the
China Development Forum in 2016.
It's this giant hall that had most
of the top leaders in the party. A
lot of the elite of the tech world,
Mark Zuckerberg and many others were there.
I said, “Okay, I'm looking at your housing.
I'm looking at your infrastructure.
It looks to me like you're going into
a classical housing crisis problem.
Your catch-up is over.
Your demographics don’t look good.”
I gave a list of things. “And by the way,
it looks like power is becoming
very centralized in the economy.”
And I said, “I'm a Western economist. You're
doing an amazing job. What do I know? But I
don’t think that would be good for growth.”
After I gave the talk—I just figured you only
live once, you just have to say what you
have to say—a couple of top leaders came
up to me and said, “Professor Rogoff,
we very much appreciated your remarks.”
I was thinking, “Oh no, they’re going to put
me in jail or something at the end of this.”
I’m less impressed by them now. And I’m worried.
Let’s say they get into a crisis—which I think
they’re in now. I think they're still in a
deep crisis—or somehow hotter heads prevail
between the United States and China and we get
into some kind of entanglement nobody wants.
I worry that we’re not as competent. I’m speaking
about right now. We have some very good people,
but the average quality at the
very top, I think, has gone down.
And China’s not as competent either. That’s
a recipe for having bad things happen.
On that talk, you mentioned in the book
that, before, you had to clear your talk.
So you gave them a sort of watered-down
version of what you were going to say.
I have to say, it would take some gusto
to go up to the top party leaders.
Were you nervous while you were giving the
talk, saying, “Oh, it’s too centralized”?
I mean I was pretty experienced by that time.
I frankly never used notes, so the idea that I
was going to read my speech didn’t even occur
to me. Maybe it was a little bit spontaneous.
But I certainly felt at that moment,
what am I here for? What’s the point
of coming to this? Why don’t I talk about
the elephant in the room? Everybody knows
this. I don’t know if everybody knew it, but
it was clear to me and I’m going to say it.
I think a lot of people in that
situation—even though they should or
the logic makes sense—they often don’t.
Yeah, I’m a professor. So people who
had a big tech company or a finance
company, or all these other businesses,
most of them can’t afford to do that.
I think they know that when they invite
a professor, they can’t cut your...
They can stop you from going again.
They invited me again, by the way.
Although the second time I just
talked to a tiny room instead of the big hall.
But, I give credit to the Chinese for listening.
You’ve said that the seeds of their current
crisis were sown in 2010 with their big stimulus.
Is it wrong then to blame Xi Jinping for
this? That was before his time. It was Hu
Jintao’s government that launched the stimulus
that’s causing all these problems now.
Hu Jinato did it, but they kept it going. The
local government debt, that was an innovation
put in with the 2010 stimulus. But they kind of
left it running and used it as a stimulus program.
Long tangent, but the local governments don’t
have enough ways to fund themselves. So they
were allowed to sell land to start and fund
these construction companies, get revenue, and
sustain themselves. They let that keep going.
When Xi Jinping came in, I was told he was
going to be Ronald Reagan. I had very good
contacts in the intellectual sphere in China.
Someone who had worked for me when I was
chief economist at the IMF, other people I
knew whom I really trust. They're really smart and
well-connected, I don’t want to say their names.
But they were telling me, “He's going to
change everything. This is really the time
we’re going to liberalize our markets a bit.
We’re going to do the things we haven’t done.”
And he didn't do that much. If you
look at China’s growth, it actually
slowed down quite a bit when he came into power.
There are different ways to measure a country’s
output because China produces completely
different stuff than we do. They use their
currency and we use ours. Nothing's perfect.
But one way to do it is this. What do they report
their output to be in Chinese currency? What
do we report ours to be in dollars? Then we use
the exchange rate to compare.
We can look at growth that
way and if you do for China, it’s been
spectacular. It’s been very, very good.
It’s obvious they're pulling it out of thin air.
But there are these approaches trying to control
for how you’d really compare how an ordinary
person lives or how an ordinary firm gets by.
When you look at those measures, China’s grown
is quite a bit less. If you go 1980 to 2012,
the official growth rate is almost 10 percent.
This purchasing power parity rate—forgive me for
using those words—is like just over 7 percent.
If you look in more recent years, it’s really
slowed down a lot. Even the official numbers
have slowed down. I don’t know the number off
the top of my head, but it’s 6% or 7% for
Xi Jinping, and maybe only 3.5%. They’re
starting from a very low base.
Okay, things were gonna slow
down. It’s not all his fault.
But I think he’s been reluctant to
take risks and I think it’s gotten us to where
we are. I think they’re in a lot of trouble.
They’re overbuilt in infrastructure. They’re
overbuilt in housing. Have you been to China?
I was there six months ago.
Where did you go?
Shanghai, Beijing, Chongqing,
Chengdu, Hangzhou, and Emeishan.
So you saw a few of the medium-sized cities.
At least one of them, I think, is the new tech
center. I can’t pronounce it.
Hangzhou?
Yeah it’s a big tech center. Some of the
smaller cities don't feel like the big
cities. And 60% of Chinese income is from
what they call their tier-three cities.
I grew up in Rochester, that’s like a tier-three
city in the United States. But you could pick
Cincinnati, Liverpool. Rouen— I may
not be saying it right—in France is
an example of a tier-three city.
And they have invested like crazy.
I’ve been to a few and I’ve studied the
data on it a lot. They have amazing roads,
amazing real estate, amazing housing.
But the feel of death in those cities...
They were very good at building stuff.
The Soviet Union was very good at building
cement factories and steel plants and
railroads. But they’ve run their course.
They have other stuff: green
energy, AI, electric vehicles.
But believe it or not, that stuff’s still tiny
compared to infrastructure and real estate.
Real estate’s a third of the
economy by some measures.
So I think they’re in a lot of trouble
now in China. They let it go on too long.
But again, I wasn’t running things. If things
seem to be working and you try to change things,
you get thrown out. It’s not
easy to be in those shoes.
When I was in China, we visited a town of
half a million people outside of Chengdu,
so one of these tier-three cities. Arriving
there, the train station is huge. Compounds are
huge. Even when you’re driving around, like
a movie theater is this humongous complex.
I realized things were bigger in China. I
was used to that because I’d seen these other
cities by that point. But I just thought,
I’ve seen cities of half a million people.
I live in a city of half a million people
in San Francisco. This just doesn’t seem
proportionate to the size of the population.
Then we visited a Buddhist temple that had
been built recently as a tourist site. It was
ginormous. You would go through one little shrine,
and then behind it would be an even bigger
structure and then another one concentrically
for like eight turns. It would take you
probably 10 minutes to drive through this thing.
There was just nobody there. It was
like me and three other white people.
It’s very much that feeling. And the young
people don’t want to live there. I have a lot
of young people here as students and I run into
people. They don’t want to live in these towns,
and the jobs aren’t there. I can’t
criticize them for trying that.
If you’d asked me in 2005, “Should we try to
encourage people to go out to the Rochesters
and the Liverpools and the Rouens in France?”
I would have said yes. There’s too much in the
big cities. There’s overcrowding. Look
what happened to São Paulo. Look what
happened to Mumbai. But I would’ve been
wrong. These forces are very powerful.
So a lot of their growth, and what they call
their GDP, is this stuff. So they’re having to
reorient and people just aren’t that flexible.
It’s like when AI comes and puts everybody out
of jobs. When construction jobs are gone,
and all these indirect things are gone,
it’s not that easy to move everyone.
If it hadn’t been for financial repression,
and all this investment had been done
through purely market mechanisms,
would things have turned out much better?
Even if China gets rid of all financial
repression today, they save a lot. So this
money has to go somewhere. Are there enough
productive opportunities to soak up all these
savings? Or could there have been in the past?
If they get rid of financial repression, is this
a problem solved, or could it have been solved?
What everyone’s told them forever is
their saving rate and investment rate
are astounding. It was higher before, but it’s
still maybe 45%, their consumption rate… ours
is pushing 70%. European countries are a little
more temperate, but they’re in the low sixties.
Their consumption is very low. They have some
wealthy people that you saw when you went to
the marquee cities. But a lot of China is
living on $200-a-month kind of incomes.
You could give them money. You could
let them consume instead of exporting
it. They’ve been very reluctant to do that.
You could do things to encourage consumption.
Actually, even just changing their exchange rate
policy to allow it to appreciate more at times,
would make imports less expensive.
They have been very reluctant to
do that. That’s what everyone tells them.
That’s certainly what I said in 2016 also.
The ticket to getting people to spend more is to
provide more security than they have. First of
all, there’s nothing like our Social Security
system. You need to save for your old age.
There’s nothing like our health system. If you
work at one of the big state-owned factories,
they give you healthcare, but
otherwise you’re on your own.
They’re not allowed to invest abroad. It goes
in waves, but they’re not allowed to put their
money abroad. So they’re trying to be careful
about all of that and not do things suddenly.
There’s nothing to do overnight.
But fundamentally, if you’re looking
at China and asking what’s wrong, it’s
that the consumer isn’t spending enough.
What’s happening right now is worse, because
housing prices are collapsing. That’s the only
thing they really let people save in. You could
either save in a bank account, which gets you
a crummy interest rate, or in a house. Now
they’re going down, so people are cutting back.
They can dig their way out. There’s no
magic bullet to make them grow at 5%. By
the way, that is the official number but
I don’t think they’re anywhere near that.
There’s no simple thing, but
the general goal would be to
try to rebalance investment, and consumption.
Going back to your point about whether purchasing
power parity is the right way to compare, or
whether nominal is the right way to compare.
I think in the book you say the nominal
comparison of GDP is better because
you can’t buy Patriot missiles or oil
with purchasing power parity dollars.
But if we’re trying to compare the strength
of the two countries—their relative strength,
especially in a military context— if they can
build ships and munitions much more cheaply,
and they have to pay their soldiers less,
isn’t that actually more relevant if we were
trying to figure out who would win in a war?
Shouldn’t we actually be looking at the fact
that they have a bigger PPP economy than us
as a sign that they’re actually stronger?
Yeah. So in the book, I’m talking
about your geopolitical power,
where if you’re going to give money to somebody,
what’s it worth and how much can they use it.
But no, you’re absolutely right. They just
crush us in shipbuilding. It’s partly because
they build commercial ships, and there’s a lot
of symbiosis between commercial and military.
I think they’re 50% of the global shipbuilding
market. For us to build a new aircraft carrier
takes years and years and incredible expense.
One of the mistakes we’re making is trying to
build everything ourselves. Let our
allies do some of this. The Koreans
are really good at building ships. That’s
another place we could be importing from.
You’re right about the soldiers. They’re
paid much less. They have a lot of
advantages in a conflict against us.
We’re way ahead in your department,
tech. That is our advantage at the moment. If
that were to dissipate, it would certainly hurt.
What is your projection? Right
now I think their nominal GDP
is 75% of America’s, or something like that.
Yeah, in dollars, what we call the market terms.
What’s your projection by
2030 and by 2040, the ratio?
I didn’t realize it was as high
as 75%. I thought it was a little
lower. I was actually going to say 75% in 2030.
At one point in 2024, it was around two-thirds,
but it’s really volatile with the exchange
rate. The dollar’s really high. When the
dollar’s really high, it makes us look bigger.
I think they’ll gain about a percent a year on us,
maybe. I don’t think they’re going to
grow way faster than the United States.
Wait, that means you think they’ll never
actually have a bigger economy than us?
It’ll take a long time. We’re
talking about the absolute size.
They have four times as many people.
There were these projections by Goldman
Sachs and many others that we’d be like
Canada is to the United States pretty soon.
Like all these extrapolations, they were
proven wrong. That brings me to a big
topic. A lot of people will look at some trend,
whether it’s growth in something, AI, China—
I was about to say. That's a common trend in AI.
—and just project it into the future.
Economists at least consider ourselves terrible
at that. You go back and look at any of these
commissions that were supposed to figure out
what was going on. They happen periodically.
Maybe Brookings puts one together, maybe
the government does. My former colleague,
the late Dick Cooper, had a whole list
of these. So it is very hard to know.
But my gut instinct is that what’s happening to
China is what’s happened to Japan. It’s what’s
happened to Asia, what happened to the Soviet
Union. We have a more dynamic economy. We’re not
perfect. Maybe we’re screwing it up right now
with all the tariff wars and deglobalization.
But we have this dynamism and creativity
that other places—at least other large
economies—just can’t replicate.
They can build stuff. The French
have better high-speed trains than we do.
I hope you don’t ride on the train from
Boston to New York. It’s nicer than it
could be, but it’s no high-speed train.
You mentioned China. Oh my gosh, their
high-speed trains are just incredible.
They’re good at that. But the really creative
stuff? I don’t want to say they don’t have any.
There are some amazing Chinese companies. But
let me say that the US is really good at it.
We’ve kept that in our DNA. I think
it’s very important, to preserve it.
The 1% per year compression is actually an
extremely bearish forecast. Even people who
are pessimistic about China will say, “Oh, by 2040
they’ll be at 150 or 125% of US nominal GDP.” They
think it’ll be bigger, but only slightly bigger.
The fact that you think even by 2040 they won’t
have caught up is actually very extremely bearish.
No, I think they're digging their way out of a
crisis. Right now we know their prices
are falling. It's not because they're
inventing stuff really fast. We know that
interest rates are being pushed to zero.
All these are signs that demand has been
crushed and the economy's not doing well.
Historically, they have given numbers which are
accurate on average, as best as we can tell.
I think that's gotten less and
less true in the Xi Jinping era.
Going back to the subject of your book. People
who are trying to predict when and how China might
invade or blockade Taiwan will look at satellite
photos of different docks and see how many ships
are there. They'll look at military preparedness.
From a monetary perspective, are there signs we
could be looking for? For example, if they think
a lot of their American-dominated assets will get
sanctioned or they won’t have access to them,
could we see them liquidating those assets?
Would there be any sort of preparations that we
could see on the monetary side to let us know
they’re preparing for something big?
I don’t think they’re going to do it
suddenly. But very crudely, on their reserves
they’re definitely moving more and more into gold.
It doesn’t necessarily help to move
into euros or Canadian dollars because
those countries might side with us. But
they’re doing what they can to diversify.
I don’t think they’ve diversified into crypto yet.
I had a student do a paper on that. But who knows.
What they are doing very concretely is
not just about what they’re holding.
That’s the big fact everyone looks at.
They officially hold a trillion dollars in
Treasury reserves. But the estimate a student of
mine did, in a nice paper—and I think others agree
with it—is that it's more like $2 trillion.
They hold a lot indirectly through proxies.
The other part of it is that the whole financial
system runs through the United States. What we
sometimes call the rails or the pipes of the
system. Your bank gets a purchase and my bank
gets that I’m going to get a credit. How does
that take place? How does it take place when
we're in different countries?
The United States just
disproportionately controls that.
That, they can’t live with.
They could live without their $2 trillion for a
little while. But they can’t live without being
able to pay suppliers and other countries.
So they're working hard on developing
their own payments mechanisms.
Russia actually did quite a bit in preparation
for the invasion. We see China doing that.
Maybe they’re selling Treasury bills, we
don’t know exactly. I would advise that to them,
if I were a Chinese economist talking to them.
But I don’t think it’s going to be something
they’ll do suddenly. Maybe Trump will bring down
the markets and then there’s nothing to save. But
they don’t want to be the ones to bring down the
markets and cause a global crash.
What would the alternative
rails that they're trying to build look
like? Are they buying oil from Iran in RMB?
Will other countries they need things from
accept that? In 2030, what is their goal?
Absolutely. There are a lot of countries in
Africa and Latin America—some of them are almost
client states of China—that they can force.
Iran, of course, sells a lot of its oil to
China even when there are sanctions.
They’re moving in that direction.
It’s not just about what you invoice the
payment in. It’s how we acknowledge it, how we
clear our books. That’s what they’re working on.
It’s coming. The Europeans are working on it too,
by the way. Europe is not happy
with the situation. They're actually
forming a central bank digital currency. It’s
moving quite a bit faster than I thought it
would. That’s actually one of the reasons
they’re doing it, for international payments.
Let’s talk about Japan, which you also
cover in the book, or their crisis.
You blame US pressure in advance of that crisis on
the Japanese to raise the value of their currency,
and the actions by the Bank of Japan.
Zooming out, how much of the crisis is
not caused by things like that, but just the fact
that high-tech manufacturing as a share of world
output was becoming less important?
There are demographic factors as well.
So something like this was
bound to happen to Japan,
even if there wasn’t some
big crisis that preceded it?
South Korea’s GDP per capita isn’t that high
either, at least in comparison to the US.
How much of this is due to
actions taken by specific actors?
South Korea had a crisis in 1983 and another in
1997. They haven’t been crisis-free, by the way.
There are a lot of factors. The
demographics would be the most obvious one.
The rise of not just China but
Korea and other competitors too.
Japan invented a business model that a
lot of countries have since duplicated.
The model was export-led growth.
Something people might not think
about is it creates competition.
Most countries aren’t as big as the
United States, and there aren’t as many different
firms trying to do the same thing. Of course,
we have trouble with competition here.
Famously, in Mexico at one time,
there were only two telephone companies,
two bread companies, two taco companies.
It’s very hard not to let monopolies
sit and use their political power.
So how do you get around that? Japan
did something that was really pretty
innovative. Germany did it too to some extent.
In the export sector you’re competing with
the world, not just with domestic firms.
That created innovation and creativity.
Japan did really well with that.
But over time, others imitated it
and started building the same things.
So that’s part of it. The aging is part
of it. But I think the financial
crisis was a very big part of it.
What is the counterfactual? Suppose that the
crisis hadn’t happened, how much wealthier is
Japan today than it might have been otherwise?
Oh, I think 50% wealthier per person,
way wealthier. That’s where they started.
It depends on which measure you use. But by
market exchange rates they were richer
than the United States in the late 1980s.
Even if you use the more complicated
measures, they were richer than any European
country, richer than Germany, France, Italy.
They’ve moved to the bottom of the rung now.
The financial crisis wasn’t the only thing.
It’s a long story but we effectively forced
them to move faster to open up and deregulate than
they were culturally and politically ready to.
I give that as an example of something
in the book where I changed my mind.
I had looked at that for a long time
afterward. Going back to 2005—that’s
long after the Japanese crisis—I would hear from
people like Jiang Zemin, who was the president
of China that I met, "We’re not going to
let this happen to us. There’s no way.”
We were discussing how I thought maybe they
shouldn’t have such a fixed exchange rate.
He said, “That’s what the United States
told Japan. Look what happened to Japan.”
I didn’t push back that much with someone
like that. You talk to other people. But
I heard that from many people.
I used to think, how can that
be? There’s this thing called the Plaza
Accord in September 1985 where we pushed
them to make their exchange rate more free.
But I used to say that you did that in 1985.
Carmen Reinhart, my co-author
on many things, and I date the
crisis to 1992. That’s seven years later.
I continued to think that but over the years,
particularly recently, I’ve
started to think I was wrong.
These things unfold slowly.
Crises don’t happen overnight.
Japan deregulated and it worked. But
they didn’t know what they were doing.
I think it was a huge mistake for Japan to agree.
I actually heard from someone who attended
the 10th anniversary of the
Plaza Accord, held in Tokyo.
The person who had been head of the Bank of
Japan in 1985 gave a speech to officials.
He went like this and apologized, very
symbolically, “I have ruined our country.
I did this. I take responsibility.”
He told that too when he read my book.
Financial repression is bad. But financial
liberalization needs to be done gradually.
If you do it too quickly, you get a
crisis. Many crises are caused by that.
Asking as somebody who obviously doesn’t
know the details, at a high level how
would you explain it to a novice?
How could a country be 50% less
wealthy than it otherwise might have
been, simply from a financial crisis?
Whatever they could’ve otherwise produced,
why can they still not produce it?
A country’s producing a bunch of things. Why
are they producing 50% less just because of
a financial crisis a couple decades ago?
Their case is very unusual, although
having a number like 10% or 20% is very typical.
In fact, one of my professors at MIT was teaching
us about the Great Depression. He said, “Here’s
how to think about it. We were growing like this,
then we get here and we go like this, and then
we’re going like this. We never got this back.”
There’s a lot of economic
models where, Solow catch-up…
Yes but what happened with a financial
crisis—particularly in Japan—is that it
sort of blew up their business model.
For example, maybe China wouldn’t have
overtaken them so quickly if they’d been able to
borrow more freely, if their financial markets
were working better, if they had been more
adroit. Their consumption collapsed. Japan
didn’t quite know how to deal with that.
We in the US were much more brutal in
what we allowed to happen than Japan,
but we got out of it pretty quickly.
I’m not sure we got back to where we
were, but we got out of it very quickly.
Japan has a very consensus-driven society. They
don’t want anyone to be in bad shape. Their
struggle with this held them back for a long time.
Maybe 50% is too high and I should say 25% or 30%,
but a lot better shape than they have been.
Just to put it into context, what do you
think the counterfactual wealth of
America looks like today without 2008?
Boy, that's a good question. I'm hesitant because
I probably have some paper giving a number for
that and I might say the wrong thing.
We certainly cumulatively lost a lot.
It led to this political crisis
that caused us to lose a lot more.
I don't know, probably 15% lower.
It’s a lot lower than it would be.
We had this dynamic which we're living in right
now. It's still an echo of that financial crisis.
Now, mind you, you're asking about our
national income. Inequality matters and
would we have done other things?
In some ways, the 2008–2009
crisis was a condemnation of the
system and people could see it.
Maybe it led to some healthy
cleansing. But I think it led
to a lot more damage than healthy cleansing.
I think this updates me toward the view that
financial crises are even worse than I think.
It isn't just this bad thing that happens and
you recover. If there's 15% lingering even
after almost 20 years, then wow that’s huge.
You’re losing a lot of cumulative growth. Look
at Greece today or Portugal. You kind of get
back to where you're having a positive
growth rate, but you're not picking up…
They're very different from a normal
recession. Actually in a normal recession,
you go down and then back up.
The United States had thought
it was immune to financial crises.
We really hadn't had one since 1933.
We had a different book that came
out in 2009. I mostly write papers,
but this was a book with Carmen Reinhart.
It was called This Time Is Different.
We had some papers published in advance.
We said: “No, they're different when you
have a financial crisis, it lasts way
longer. The slowdown is way worse.”
And we were mocked when we were saying that. I
think the New York Times had a two-page spread
saying how ridiculous everyone thought this was.
We could have been proven wrong and maybe
if we’d done things better we
would have. But it is the norm.
There’s a few exceptions, like
Sweden got out in a year or two.
But normally they really are
different from a normal recession.
You say in the book that you expect there to
be another spike in inflation within the next
decade and also that the fiscal position of
the United States doesn’t seem sustainable.
If you go forward 10 or 20 years,
when we do hit this, when the
piper comes calling, what actually happens?
Is it going to be some acute crisis, like what
happened in Greece? Or are we going to have some
kind of Lost Decade like Japan? What will happen?
Typically, you have a crisis of some sort when
your debt is high and your political system is
inflexible. We’ve checked those boxes.
Then you get hit by a shock you weren’t
ready for. You get caught on your back foot. It
depends on what the shock is, and how we react.
The way Japan reacted was through what we call
financial repression, basically stuffing debt
into every insurance company, pension fund, bank.
The central bank holds almost 100% of GDP in debt.
We think we have a lot—I don’t actually know
the number off the top of my head for the Fed,
but I want to say around $7 trillion.
Japan would have the equivalent of $30 trillion.
So they’ve done this. It’s not the only
reason they haven’t grown, not by any means,
but it’s not good for growth. That’s one option.
I think for the United States, that’s tough.
We’re just a very market-driven system. If our
financial system had that kind of pressure put
on it, it would be worse than when Japan did it.
And a lot of people lend to us. We can’t do that
to them. We can’t force French insurance companies
to hold US debt. We can only force U.S. ones.
So I think the most likely
thing will be inflation,
which only lets off steam. Because inflation
sort of pulls… well, it’s like a default.
And I’m not talking about hyperinflation. I’m
talking 10–20% inflation over a period. We just
went through that. That actually knocked about 10%
of GDP off our debt. We might need more next time.
So it lets some steam off, but if you’re
still spending too much and you haven’t
fixed anything you’re back in the problem.
That’s what’s going on now. We had some steam
let off, but it wasn’t enough.
I think when it happens again,
markets will be very unforgiving about it.
They’ll look at us and say, “You are not to
be trusted.” So it’ll raise the interest
rate more, our debt will build up faster.
I think at that point… There’s this saying
about Americans attributed to Winston Churchill:
we always do the right thing after we try
everything else. I suspect we’ll try other things.
Just for the audience, there are four ways we
could get out of the debt: We could default,
which you don’t think is likely...
But really good for my book.
Already you timed this one so well. I’ll be
shorting the market when your next one comes out.
...Financial repression. I guess you could
actually cut the deficit. Or inflation.
You’re saying if there’s another
round of inflation, then after that...
What everyone calls austerity. By the way, this
word “austerity” that progressives use whenever
you ignore debt building up and spend whatever
you want, “austerity” is when you don’t do that.
I think Ezra Klein’s book Abundance
actually makes the point that there are
costs and benefits to a lot of things.
This “austerity” language pretends
there are no costs to having your
debt be higher and only benefits.
So yes, that’s what everyone else has to do.
We’ve gone longer than most without doing it.
If it's going to be a financial crisis
and financial crises are this bad…
Inflation crisis. A financial crisis
is the private sector, and the public
sector bails out the private sector.
So, the government, we’re not going to
default. We're going to inflate, or do financial
repression, or baby steps austerity or something.
We're not going to have a crisis like Greece had.
That’s just wrong. But inflation's not pleasant.
Why wouldn’t we?
Because we can print money. We can
honor our debts. We just never have to default.
Greece was using the euro and didn’t have control.
Japan was using its own
currency and it didn’t default.
They had a financial crisis, not a
debt crisis. They never defaulted
on their government debt in that period.
I’m not sure if they ever did. I’m sorry,
they did in World War II. Of course, Japan
defaulted on its government debt in World
War II. That’s an interesting story.
But it was a financial crisis they had.
Financial crisis is what’s making your banking
system not work, lending to innovators not work,
lending to dynamic companies not work.
Ben Bernanke wrote at the time a
thought piece about this. He didn’t
really have numbers. He conjectured
that was why the Great Depression was so bad.
When Milton Friedman, one of the great economists
of all time, looked at the Great Depression,
he said: “You didn’t print enough money. You
tightened the money supply too much."
And Ben came along 25 years later.
He was a classmate of mine in graduate school.
I had the office next to him at Princeton.
He came along and wrote this amazing
paper. Again, it was just a thought piece,
which is not a typical economics paper.
He said, “If it was just that you didn’t print
enough money, eventually wages and prices would
adjust. Yeah, maybe it wouldn’t happen in a year,
maybe it wouldn’t happen in two years, but the
Depression took 10 years. How can that be?”
He made this conjecture. There’s been a lot of
subsequent work showing it. Again, there’s a lot
of debate about this, let me be careful.
But I certainly view the weight of
evidence as saying financial crises are really
bad, which has led us to the situation in the
United States where we’ve gotten a little
happy-go-lucky about bailing everyone out.
I would describe Treasury and Federal
Reserve policy today as, “When in doubt,
bail it out.” Because they saw what happened.
But as your financial sector grows,
that will lead to a problem someday.
It did, of course, in the Silicon Valley Bank
case. It continues to have echoes of that.
But I think an inflation crisis is more
likely than a financial crisis, although
these things are very hard to predict.
You say in the book that we didn’t outgrow our
World War II debt. What happened instead was
that financial repression after the war, and then
the inflation of the 1970s made our debt-to-GDP
ratio… It should have been 70-something,
but it ended up around 20-something instead.
Of course, we just had inflation recently.
Do you think there’s some irrationality in
the market for US government debt already, given
that we can forecast what’s going to happen here?
They can read your book and see that
inflation’s going to go up. They can
look through history at what’s happened.
Do you think there’s some irrationality
in terms of what people are doing?
I think, number one, is that they have too much
faith in the independence of the Federal Reserve.
The Fed’s been this amazing institution that’s
evolved. It’s been the guardian of
low inflation. We can argue about
if it’s the right inflation or not.
The Federal Reserve insists it’s very
independent. The Supreme Court recently ruled that
Trump couldn’t fire Powell, the head of the Fed.
But I think they’re dreaming. There are so
many ways Congress and the President could
override the Fed, especially if they declare some
kind of wartime or “war-on-pandemic” situation.
Though I wonder from the politician’s
perspective, maybe the independence of the
Fed gives them a convenient way to pass the buck
that they’re actually happy about. They can say,
“Ah, I’d love to do this irresponsible thing, but
I can’t because of the Fed. It’s out of my hands.”
That’s for sure. That’s why Trump bashes the Fed.
It’s not the only reason he does it. I think he
actually disagrees with them. But he feels
that bashing the Fed, if there’s a recession
which there might be, gives him someone
to blame for not lowering interest rates.
It depends if we run into a world where interest
rates start creeping up… Right now, the 10-year
rate is around 4.5%. That’s the nominal rate. The
inflation-indexed one is a little over 2%. The
30-year rate is around 5%. I think those are going
to drift up. And that makes mortgage rates go up,
student loans go up, car loans go up,
business loans go up. It’s painful.
The question is, at what point
does that pain become real?
As I mentioned, this would be catalyzed if
we’re hit by a shock, where you can somewhat
take back independence temporarily from the Fed.
I think it’s easier to do than people think. Given
that I think shocks are going to happen—maybe
AGI brings a shock we don’t yet imagine—people
trust in Fed independence too much.
Now, I love Fed independence. I actually
wrote the first paper on why you should
have an independent central bank back when
there were virtually no independent central
banks. I was a pawn at the Federal Reserve.
I’m talking my own book when I say it’s a
great idea. I don’t mean my “book” book,
I mean my human capital.
I like to say that the Federal
Reserve fights for its independence every day.
I hear senators say, “They’re idiots.” I hear
people in Silicon Valley say, “They’re idiots.
We should bring them under the Treasury.”
I used to hear that just from progressives.
But now I’ve heard that recently from
some tech titans, that “Scott Bessent, the
Treasury Secretary, he’s smarter than Powell.
Why don’t we let him run things?” They could.
It does seem like the Fed works really well as
it exists now. It’s independent. Sure, there are
people who criticize its actions as you say. But
on the whole, it seems like a reliable
institution that makes smart calls. They can
be wrong, of course, but it seems so much more
competent than much of the rest of government.
If you wanted to replicate how
the Fed works—if you wanted other
parts of government to work that way—is there
something we could do? Or is it more of a human
capital problem than an independence problem?
Like, bankers and economists are really smart.
I don’t know if you could replicate
that in the Department of Education or
the Department of Agriculture.
One of the things the Fed has is this simple
barometer that everybody sees. They don’t really
see it, but they have a feeling. They see gasoline
prices, that's probably how they decide what
inflation is. But they have this simple barometer.
Mind you, particularly in recent years,
progressives have wanted the Fed to
solve inequality, social justice, and the
environment. But they have one barometer
that they kind of control over the long run,
not in the short run but over the long run.
So that makes it a little easier to say,
“You wanted us to have low inflation.”
Whereas so many other things the government
does might be making everybody better off,
but they’re making some people more better
off. Maybe some people aren’t better off
at all. It suddenly becomes very political.
Nobody elected the Fed, so it’s harder to
make those decisions. I’m obviously a
technocrat, or I side with technocrats.
My students are technocrats. I think
way more things should be like that.
But if you wanted to do that, suppose you get
called by the Pentagon tomorrow and they say,
“We want to run the Pentagon like the
Fed.” What do you tell them to do?
I was going to say, the Pentagon? I’m not speaking
about the current Pentagon, but just up till now.
I haven’t looked closely but it’s been run pretty
darn well. The military’s pretty efficient.
There are people who tell me, “Okay, Elon
Musk can take a payload into space at 15%
of—or maybe one-fifteenth of—what NASA
does. Why don’t we let Elon Musk run
the Pentagon?” There may be something to that.
I think to some extent—and maybe I’m defending
them too much—but you never know where the next
blow is going to come from. It always looks like
a lot of your stuff is wasted, you built up. But
your enemy is looking at what you have. Where are
you weak? Where are you strong? So I wouldn’t
have picked the Pentagon as the obvious thing.
But let’s say crypto regulation, that
would be a good example. Why don’t we
have something more independent there? Instead,
as you well know, it’s been overrun by politics.
In fact, there’s this huge thing going on right
now. I don’t know how it’s going to play out.
The Fed has been protected, though not as
much as you’d think. But Trump got to the
Supreme Court and was told he can fire the
head of any agency. I assume, by inference,
he can also fire anybody at any agency.
I think that’s a terrible mistake. We
need to have independent agencies. You have an
evaluation process. They answer to Congress.
If they go off in the wrong direction, you try to
fix it. But to just have everything switch every
four years? That’s really very worrisome.
Before Trump—maybe for intrinsic reasons,
maybe because of norms—it was really hard
to fire people anyway. That didn’t produce
remarkable competence across the government.
Let me try to consolidate some of the things
you mentioned. Maybe it’s really important to
structure more of the government like that.
If you're running a department, you
have just one target like the Fed’s
2% inflation target. That’s all you have
to do. Don’t worry about anything else.
I do think it’s impressive that the Fed has
avoided mission creep. It seems like every
institution in the world falls into mission
creep—companies, government departments…
Oh, they haven’t avoided it. They’ve
been under incredible pressures.
Obviously, things have changed.
But I talk about this a bit in my book. You
go through the working papers and research coming
out of the various Federal Reserves and it's all
about inequality, the environment, social justice.
You’d be strained to find a paper about monetary
policy during that period, because
they were under pressure. Part of
being independent is bending with the wind.
But they’ve managed to keep their core competency,
their core function of setting
monetary policy independent.
No, it’s been amazing. But it is a constant fight.
You can go to a country like Turkey. I don’t know
what the inflation rate is today,
but it hovered up toward 100%.
And Erdoğan—the president of Turkey—would fire the
head of the central bank every year. Every time
they tried to raise interest rates, he’d fire
them. You can find other countries like that.
So we’ve been lucky. But you
can’t count on that continuing.
Apart from the political pressure problems
from the outside, you mentioned watching
your younger colleagues or younger economists
writing working papers at the Fed about these
other issues like inequality or climate change.
From the inside, given what the younger people
in this profession care about, do you expect
the competence or the focus to just decline
by default, given the new generation?
No, this was a wake-up call. There was
a blog that Hoover did. They looked at the
most-used words in our big annual meetings.
There’s this thing called the American Economic
Association meetings. Everybody goes. They took
all the abstracts and titles from the
last 15 years and the word inflation had
not appeared until this year.
But why are you optimistic
about when they get in charge...?
There’s an intellectual market. This
was a huge miss and there’s a market for figuring
it out. One of the good things about the American
university system—at least in the sciences,
and I’ll speak for economics—is that things
drift off but if something is way wrong—and
they were certainly way wrong about inflation,
I believe, and way wrong about interest
rates and debt—then there’s some rebalancing.
We have a very competitive system of publishing.
We have a seminar system that’s just ruthless.
There’s a debate around it. It’s not settled,
and maybe I’m wrong and they’re right but it’s
definitely being debated now.
Whereas 10 years ago, I think I
was like a lone voice in the wilderness
saying these things might happen again.
I would teach inflation to my students. They’d
sit there patiently. It was like I was teaching
them the music of Fred Astaire or something.
They’d go, “Okay, it’s the 21st-century,
the Internet, that can never happen.”
Or I’d teach debt. If I had foreign students,
they were all having problems. But the
American students were like, we can
just do whatever we want. But it’s changed.
Going back to the potential future problems,
if we do go the financial repression route and
not the inflation route, how bad will that be?
As you were saying, after World War II we had
financial repression. But that was when we had
the highest growth ever. On the other hand,
China and Japan, it seems like a lot of their
problems might be caused by the misallocation
of capital that financial repression created.
Do you have some intuition about
how much we screw ourselves over
with that route, as opposed to inflation?
We’ll start with World War II but it’s never just
one thing, obviously. There were a lot of things.
So with World War II first of all, financial
repression was easy. The financial markets
had been destroyed by the Great Depression.
World War II became something of
a command-and-control economy.
There are a lot of interesting papers about World
War II that show that Americans just worked really
enthusiastically. There was real patriotism in
the production. I’m not saying we’re not now,
but back then they were able to fill factory
jobs that we probably couldn’t even fill today.
As we emerged from World War II we had all the
soldiers come home. That’s a huge growth lift.
We didn’t manage it perfectly. We actually had
quite a bit of inflation during that period.
The financial markets, as you grew up in and
as young people know them today, didn’t exist
back then. The world has changed a lot.
Does that mean US growth would have been
even higher after World War II if we had
just kept the government debt or figured
out some other way to deal with it and
let financial markets develop earlier?
Maybe. We didn’t have any financial crises for a
long time because the markets were very repressed.
Oftentimes, when you get a financial crisis
it’s exactly when somebody comes along and says,
“I know, I can make us grow way
faster. Let’s just take away all
the rules and regulations overnight.”
That happened in one country after
another. It works, until you blow up.
So you’d have to say that, by and large,
it was managed rather well. We
grew. The rest of the world grew.
It took time for private markets
to develop. One thing I should’ve
emphasized was that our debt was very high
after World War II, about what it is now.
But there was nothing else. There wasn’t all this
private debt. That had all been defaulted on. I’m
being slightly hyperbolic but maybe it was 50%
of GDP altogether. Everything else, state and
local debt, had been defaulted on. Now, it’s
bigger than the federal debt by a wide margin.
So it was a very different world, putting in
financial repression back then, compared to now
when that’s a big part of our business
models in the financial sector.
Just to make sure we’ve completed the
concrete scenarios, basically your
prediction is that there’ll be some crisis, some
surge of inflation, then there’ll be austerity.
And then what happens? Is growth
really slow afterward because
the government can’t spend as much? What do
the next few decades look like in your world?
I think it will be quite a wake-up call for
Americans, having to adjust under difficult
circumstances. Most likely, we get hit by a
shock. We want to borrow a lot. The bonds are
rising faster than they did the other times
we did. And we're not able to do as much.
It’s not the end of the world. During the
European debt crisis from 2010 to 2012,
most European countries raised their retirement
ages. They didn’t do it right away. They did it
10 or 15 years out. There’s stuff you can do.
So I want to be careful here and say it’s
not like the end of the world,
but it’ll be pretty unpleasant.
This will affect the entire world, since
the global system is very dollar-centric.
It won’t be good for our franchise,
the dollar being so used everywhere.
As other countries start using the dollar less,
our interest rates will climb even higher.
I’m an academic. I’m not trying to push my ideas
by being maximally hysterical. But hysterical is
definitely within the realm of possibility here.
What I’m saying is more likely than not,
not that it’s not definitely going to happen. We
could have growth. We could have a whole lot of
high-skill immigration. We could make changes.
There are a lot of things that could go well.
On the growth thing, Europe’s growth has been
pretty bad after 2010. Japan obviously has had
pretty bad growth after their crisis. Why will
we be in a different position if we do have this
kind of crisis? Why will growth continue apace?
No, it’s going to cause a pause in growth. The
main reason debt crises happen is we don’t
have an automated system of working it out.
When the stock market crashes it’s painful,
you’re looking around for who got hurt.
But when you have debt crashes, we take five
years, ten years, to figure out who owes what.
It’s that process of allocating
the losses that causes problems.
That, by the way, is why so many
people thought, “China’s fine. The
president will just tell everyone what it is.”
That turns out to be not as true as they thought.
Is it possible to believe both that AGI is near
and that America’s fiscal position is untenable?
What do you mean by saying AGI is coming?
Any job that can be done purely through
computers is automated. So white-collar work, the
work we do even, is automated within 20 years.
Anytime you get a big productivity boost, it’s
fantastic. If it comes quickly, yes that can
solve problems. I will say that historically,
there have been lots of times when countries
had good growth—even higher than their interest
rates—and they still got into trouble because
fiscal policy isn’t mechanical. It’s political.
It’s about how much you spend, who wants
what. It’s not an arithmetic question.
Let me say it another way. Nobody ever
defaulted or had high inflation because
of arithmetic, because they couldn’t pay,
or couldn’t have called in someone who knew what
to do. They do it because of political pressures.
I think if AGI came that fast and
that big, it would make the populism
phenomenon we’re facing now seem like nothing.
If AI is going to be massively deflationary—if
it makes all these goods so much cheaper—should
we be printing a bunch of money to still stick to
2% inflation? Or does that not matter anymore?
Well, we certainly can run monetary policy the
same way. You don’t automatically get deflation
just because some goods are going down.
You can do things to increase demand so that there
are upward pressures on final prices. Even if the
AI workers aren’t demanding anything, you can put
in a lot of demand so firms charge a lot, not just
for the services that AI is replacing but also
for the raw minerals and materials that go in.
Fundamentally, when you have productivity, it
makes it easier for the monetary authorities—the
Federal Reserve—to deliver low inflation
and good growth. That’s what they’re trying
to do. It makes their job easier. And I think it
takes the pressure off them—somewhat—to inflate,
because things are going pretty well.
So there aren't the same pressures.
But should they be trying to fight
the deflation at all, in that world?
Because traditionally we need inflation to
root out the rentiers and to fight downward
wage rigidity. But now the AIs have all the
jobs, so we don’t need to worry about that.
There are a bunch of biases humans have
that we need inflation to correct for. Do
we even need that in a world with AI?
Okay, that is a very good point. Frankly,
Keynes founded modern macroeconomics.
He was an incredible Renaissance person,
having both sides of the brain.
One of his insights that just
transformed things was this.
Before Keynes, we used what
we now call general equilibrium models: demand and
supply, prices moving to keep everything in line.
But Keynes was looking at the Great Depression
and said, “Prices should be coming down. But
they’re not. Why aren't they?”
That’s really a cornerstone.
At the end of the day, it’s mostly
human behavior. It’s mostly workers.
So if you have these docile AI workers—they’re
not workers, they’re just firms—and if you have
firms that are willing to let prices fall, then
certainly you can do that. I mean, we’re still
going to have some human workers? I don't know.
But here’s a question on what monetary policy
should be. Do you think interest rates
are going to go up or down? When we had
deflation last time—from demand-deflation,
like after the financial crisis and the
pandemic—interest rates went down.
My intuition here is that interest
rates would need to go up. I mean real interest
rates, real inflation-adjusted interest rates.
And then, deflation isn’t such a problem. You
just don’t let the interest rates go up as much.
Last time, interest rates went to basically
zero. That’s a whole other line of discussion.
They felt they couldn’t lower them
into significantly negative territory.
So they were sort of paralyzed. There was
this deflation, or at least too-low inflation.
Monetary authorities thought they
knew how to create inflation,
but that’s always been by cutting interest
rates lower. When they hit a bottom, they don’t.
I have a whole book about negative interest
rates and that’s a whole other thing.
If we’re imagining real interest rates
going up, then it’s not much of a technical
problem. You just let the interest rates rise
a little less so you’re not getting deflation.
Do you expect interest rates to go up? Because one
factor is that you want to invest in the future,
the future has so much more potential. Another
is that maybe you want to consume more now,
because you know you’re going to be wealthier
in the future anyway. You might as well start
spending as much as you can now.
I think AGI and AI are upward
pressures on interest rates for lots of
crude reasons. The huge energy needs.
Traditionally, when you did a lot
of investment it raised wages,
but it’s possible— there are economists like
Daron Acemoglu who’ve shown it can go both ways,
it’s not difficult to show that—if you're really
just substituting for workers, it’s making capital
more valuable, you just invest even more.
The pressures on monetary policy will depend a
little bit on that. In principle, it makes life
easier. If it did push the interest rate down to
zero, there are interesting questions
around that, but maybe your audience
might not be as fascinated by them as I am.
Let’s talk about it a little bit. If we expect
interest rates to go up because of AI, what
should the government be doing right now to
be ready for that? Should they be locking in
hundred-year bonds at the current interest
rates since they’re only going up from here?
I’m going to get to that. But first, just where
we are… I follow interest rates today
all the time. Maybe a lot of people
who listen to you don’t. But let’s talk
about inflation-adjusted interest rates.
There’s a 10-year bond that’s indexed to
the inflation rate, issued by our Treasury.
Inflation-indexed debt is only about 10% of our
total debt. There are tax considerations—it’s
not perfect—but it’s a pretty good measure
of what we call the real interest rate.
It had gone to minus one at one point after the
pandemic. It averaged zero for about 10 years,
from 2012 to 2021. And it’s higher now.
That is, for a macroeconomist, the biggest
question in the world. Because it affects asset
prices, it affects risk, it affects volatility.
I regard it as just a normalization.
I think it was likely to happen.
If you go around and talk to some of my
younger colleagues, or folks at other places,
there’s quite a debate about that. A
lot of people think, “We’re getting old,
we’re not inventing anything...” I know you’ve
just been arguing against that and good for you.
I tend to think interest rates are more likely to
go up than down, going forward. I’m talking about
these long-term interest rates—the Federal
Reserve just sets the overnight interest
rate—these long-term interest rates are set by
markets, and I think they’re more likely to go up.
But I think AGI is only a piece of it. Debt is
rising everywhere. There’s the remilitarization
of much of the world. Needing to deal with climate
change. Eventually if we’re not dealing with it,
then we’re dealing with climate disasters.
There’s growing populism, geopolitical
fracturing, many things.
I tend to think interest
rates are going to go up but not just for the
good reason that we’ve gotten more creative
and that everything’s going to be better.
You've said in the book that you expect a
rebalancing from US equities to foreign
equities. US equities have outpaced
foreign stocks for the last couple of decades.
You say you expect this to change or that there
will be some rebalancing. What causes that?
What I say very concretely is that when the
dollar is really high, you should expect the
euro to go up. I feel strongly about that.
My first important paper was about exchange
rates. That’s why the book’s about exchange rates.
When Japan’s really weak or when the dollar’s
really strong—it’s very hard to predict exchange
rates—but I think the euro will do well.
There’s a lot of room to catch-up in Europe.
I actually think I’m nuanced in what I say
in the book. Trump hadn’t been elected yet,
but I say Europe seems to be
under pressure to re-militarize.
I was aware that Harris was probably
going to cut the US defense budget,
so that would put pressure on them.
Re-militarizing would actually be
good for the euro. It would be good
for technology in Europe. It would
give them more geopolitical power in the system.
Now, just so your listeners can calibrate this,
my first book was a very mathematical one,
Foundations of International Macroeconomics.
In theory, you should diversify. You shouldn’t
put all your money in the United States. I did a
video with Zbigniew Brzezinski, Mika
Brzezinski’s father. For those who
don’t know, he was Carter’s Kissinger.
I did a video with him that Merrill Lynch
produced. It was about why international
diversification could be good. What they
got me to say was very, very limited.
I feel quite fine about what I said.
I wasn’t doing any consulting at the time,
just academic work. I didn’t do speeches,
I didn’t do consulting. I talked to
central banks a bit, but I didn’t do
anything for money. But I did get paid for that.
It circulated half a million copies of it. A lot
of my friends teased me and said I would’ve made a
lot more money if I hadn’t followed my own advice.
I can think of plenty of other examples like that.
But yes, my instinct is that—this idea that our
US premium should just keep getting
bigger and bigger—these things have
some regression to the mean. Maybe not
with AI all being in the US, I don’t know.
Is it that you’re predicting
that the S&P keeps growing at 8%,
but foreign equities do even better?
I’m just going to safely say foreign
equities do better than dollar equities.
But not because the growth in US equities
slows down, it’s just that
foreign equities do even better?
Look, you have a lot of friends who spend all
their time doing this. I wouldn’t pretend to.
I hold a very neutral portfolio because I talk to
policymakers and world leaders even on occasion.
I don’t want to be someone who’s talking about
regulating Bitcoin and owning a lot of Bitcoin,
to pick a random example.
So I wouldn’t regard myself
as great at this. But yes, I think there’s
a case for international diversification,
particularly into Europe at this point
because they have so much potential catch-up.
Just as in California, where you’re from, there’s
a little bit of dim awareness that it might be
overregulated and you might want to do things
differently, I feel that’s happening in Europe.
If you look internationally, if you'd been
betting on catch-up, I wonder how you’d
backtest it. There’s some intuition there that if
you’re poor and you’re further from the frontier,
it makes sense that it would be easier for you to
catch up. But there’s another intuition that if
you’ve been persistently behind the frontier,
there must be some deep endogenous reason.
You’re absolutely right. For example, Asia has
a lot more governance problems on the whole.
There’s a reason that their price-earnings
ratios are lower, because you don’t
trust the governance. You’re right.
That’s fair and a lot of people are
just betting on that. But I don’t think Europe
is so hopeless that it can’t pull it together.
I can make a comparison. I'm a basketball fan.
The Boston Celtics just got crushed by the Knicks,
just before we’re taping this. Part of
it is because our star, Jayson Tatum,
was injured. You may not have gotten any
better, Europe in this case, but if somebody’s
hobbling the United States—I do think that’s
going on to some extent now—you do better.
Is there some institutional reform we
could make that would get us out of this
political equilibrium we're stuck in.
Both parties, when they're in power,
are incentivized to increase the debt and there's
no institutional check on that proclivity.
There have been a lot of people who’ve tried
this, for example by having what are called
fiscal councils. I did a paper once with
Julia Pollak, who’s a brilliant economist,
when she was an undergraduate. That was quite a
while ago. A number of countries experimented with
fiscal councils, but it hasn't worked.
The country that's done the most with
this is probably the United Kingdom. George
Osborne, when he was Chancellor, set up this
fiscal authority. The big thing they did
is they made predictions so the government
doesn’t get to make up different predictions.
You don’t necessarily have to go by their numbers,
but they got to say whatever they thought.
Our CBO does not get to do that quite the
same. Our Congressional Budget
Office is very good, but they are
constrained to believe what Congress tells them.
If Congress says, “We’re putting in this tax hook,
but it’s going to go away after ten years,”
or “We’re doing this policy, it’s all going
to change,” then they’re forced to use those
parameters. The UK version is more independent.
There are lots of complaints about it, but that’s
a very poor man’s fiscal authority, just somebody
who says, “This is what your deficit looks like.”
It’s the same thing as our CBO, but with more
independence. It helps. But I think it
has to go to our electoral system, right?
Our campaign financing. Do we have term limits?
You think that would help? I think, if anything,
if you’re longer in office, you might have a more
long-term incentive. To the extent that a lot of
the deficit problems are caused by populism, I
don’t know how much campaign finance would help.
Maybe you’re right. I don’t have
a magical solution to this. It’s
all over the world. Nobody's finding
a particularly great solution to it.
The only encouraging thing is that
these things go in waves. So maybe
this one will end. But we’re certainly in
a really difficult situation right now.
Somebody asked me, “If you were advising a
Republican president or something, what would
you do? What problem would you face?” The biggest
problem is that in a few years there’s going to
be a Democratic president. They’re going to do
exactly the opposite of what you wanted to do.
It’s the same thing for the Democratic presidents.
How do you have some continuity? How do you have
policies put in place that the public can rely on?
We’ve done well in the United States in some ways
because our government’s been kind of weak and
hasn’t been doing stuff. The private sector can
work around it. I’m not saying it’s perfect.
There are lots of things we should do. But
look, this is out of my paycheck, so to speak.
You're the former Chief Economist of the IMF!
All right, but that’s economics.
These are very political questions.
Brexit’s an example of democracy gone amok.
What a dumb idea. I don’t know if Brexit was
right or wrong. I feel like we’ll know in 50
years. But you shouldn’t be able to do it with
a simple majority vote. You should need a
two-thirds vote, or something like that.
There’s a whole government department here
with people specializing in what we should do.
Actually, I think there are
experiments. Washington State
experimented with different voting choices.
Maine did. There are these ideas out there,
but we’re a long way from converging on anything.
If you think people are underweighting how big
the debt issue is, are you especially
long on countries which have a low
debt-to-GDP ratio, like Australia or Norway?
It's not the only thing going on in the world,
your debt is just one thing. Countries
like Australia and Canada for example
are what we call commodity exporters.
They know that sometimes the sun shines
and sometimes it's a dark winter.
They don’t quite sell oil but they
sell some coal, natural gas, and some oil.
They understand things move around and that
they need to save for a rainy day.
Norway is in a whole other league.
But yes, there are lots of factors to
whether a country will do well. The
lower-debt countries have less of a problem.
But Canada and Australia face very volatile
income streams because of commodities, so
they tend to be more nervous about debt.
By the way, they also have a lot of housing debt,
in Canada for example that's been a big problem.
But I’m bullish on the United States.
Don’t misunderstand me. I’m not saying
everyone should leave the United States
and go to Canada, although my wife
thinks that sometimes but for other reasons.
When I was playing chess in the late 1960s,
I was living by myself in Europe. Nixon
got elected. I felt about Nixon the way
I think a lot of people in your generation
or at least millennials feel about Trump.
I didn’t want to come back to the United
States. So there are a lot of people who talk
that way. But I think the United States is great.
Countries that are smaller, that aren’t the
reserve currency, that don’t have access to
these deep pockets of domestic and foreign
borrowing—and all of those countries fit into
that framework, they need to be more careful.
This "exorbitant privilege," as you talk about
it, is it possible that one way in which it's
bad for us is that it allows, or incentivizes
us, to take on more debt than it's wise to?
And especially if this isn’t a permanent advantage
we have. When you’re at the top, you take out this
cheap debt. And over time you lose your reserve
status, or it weakens at least, and you have to
refinance that debt at higher interest rates.
So in the short term, you’re incentivizing
this behaviour which is not
sustainable in the long run.
Is there a political economy explanation
for why that might be bad for us?
I've heard that argument, but I basically think
it's great for us. It's not just the government.
It’s all of us who borrow less. Do we wish we
were paying higher interest rates? Probably
most people who are getting a mortgage right
now feel like our interest rates are plenty
high. They don't need to see them higher.
I think with the exorbitant privilege, there
are some drawbacks we don't need to get into.
But it's basically incredibly fantastic if you
owe $37 trillion as our government does, to be
paying half a percent to a percent less. We're
talking about hundreds of billions of dollars.
Our ability to see what's going on everywhere.
A lot of what our spying does is using our
exorbitant privilege and the dollar network.
Sanctions. I mentioned, I was in my teens
at the end of the 1960s when I didn't want
to come back. One reason I didn’t want to come
back was the Vietnam War was pretty terrifying.
I had many friends get drafted. Their brains got
fried by heroin even if they didn’t get killed.
And, sanctions. I'm not saying that we've solved
all our wars with sanctions. But make no mistake,
we have used that in place of military
intervention a few times. So that’s been
great. I think losing that, and not appreciating
how important that is, is a terrible blunder
that we might be making right now.
This is a very naive question. I
know you address it at length in your book.
I’ll ask the question in the most straightforward
way and then you can explain what's going on.
How should I think about the fact that we are
basically giving the rest of the world
pieces of paper and we're getting real
goods and services in exchange?
Sure, at a high level you can say
that they're getting this liquidity or
they're getting this network and that's
what makes it worth it. But I don’t know, are
we fundamentally getting away with something?
So just to note, the United Kingdom is
not the reserve currency. They're not
the dominant currency. They used to be,
a hundred years ago. They look a lot like
us now, with big current account deficits.
That’s actually why Trump was able to
strike a deal with them. Because they weren’t
really running a surplus against us, anyway.
They’re over-financialized, even more than we are.
The core of the benefit we get is that we
borrow by issuing safe assets—if you want to
call our debt safe—and we invest in risky stuff.
Charles Kindleberger, wrote one of the great
books on crises. I had him as a professor at MIT.
He called us bankers to the world. He
said “Yep, we’re running this deficit,
they’re holding a lot of our Treasury bills,
but we are making money hand over fist.”
It’s the same thing as the equity premium
where you hold stocks and it’s not always,
but on average better than holding
bonds. So that’s been very good.
You have the fact that the dollar
is very liquid, the markets.
Say you're a Silicon Valley firm and you're
big enough to issue debt internationally.
I don’t know if any Silicon Valley
firms ever issue debt, but if you did,
people will buy it because it’s in dollars.
If you're the same firm in France, forget it.
They don’t want to hold euros. Even if you promise
to pay in dollars, they’re not happy about it
because your income isn't in dollars.
So it’s been fantastic. This
is something that's been debated.
Stephen Miran, who was a Harvard student,
he's the head of Trump’s Council of
Economic Advisers. Very smart guy.
He's made this clever argument that because
everybody loves our currency, it makes us less
competitive in everything else. It partly hollowed
out our manufacturing and that’s terrible.
There’s a little bit of truth to that.
First of all, the dollar goes like this,
so it’s not always high.
Second, I mentioned the
United Kingdom is kind of in the same boat.
We’re good at a lot of things. We’re good at tech.
Tech makes the dollar stronger, make no mistake.
We’re good at biotech, agriculture. We’re good at
a lot of other things that make the dollar high.
And if you’re good at these things, it’s harder
to be good at manufacturing. It
bids up the cost of everything.
On the whole, we’re performing this banking
function. That’s really the big thing.
It’s been going on since the ’50s and ’60s. That’s
the core of our so-called exorbitant privilege.
There’s a really interesting book
by Charles Mann. I think it's called
1493. It’s about how during the Ming Dynasty in
17th-century China, they kept issuing different
paper currencies and it was super unstable. People
in China wanted a reliable medium of exchange.
So tens of thousands of tons of silver
from the New World, from the Spanish,
would be exchanged for enormous amounts
of real goods exported from China.
So from the Spanish perspective, they’re
getting shiploads and shiploads of real
goods, and all they’re giving up is this
medium of exchange. I don’t know how
analogous that is to the current situation.
There are countries like Ecuador and others
that dollarize. They literally use the dollar
and they need dollars. We’re able to have them
hold dollars. It’s not silver, but we print it
and they pay very low interest rates. They’re
holding Treasury bills, not physical dollars.
Yeah, it’s fantastic for us. We definitely
pay less on our debt because of that.
That’s a fascinating example you bring
up. The Chinese actually invented the printing
press. They invented paper currency way before the
Europeans. But then, what do you know, they kept
printing a lot of it and had a lot of inflation.
I hadn’t read that book, but it’s a great
example. I knew they were using silver,
but that number is bigger than I had heard.
Final question. A big part of your book
discusses the different countries which seemed at
different times to be real competitors to America.
You talk about the Soviet Union, Japan, China
today. We've discussed why they didn’t pan out.
We can go into the details on any one of those
examples, but in the big picture is there some
explanation that generalizes across all these
examples of why America has been so competitive?
Or why it's been so hard to displace?
It’s not just that we’ve stayed on top,
we’ve just gone like this. Remember, in the 1970s,
Europe actually peeled away from the dollar bloc.
But the rest of the world started globalizing.
China globalized. Eventually the Soviet Union,
and the dollar just colonized all these places.
They were all holding dollar debt, using dollars.
It’s much bigger than even the British pound was
when the sun never set on the British Empire.
So it’s been amazing and surprising to people
like myself. If you read what everyone was
saying at the time, it was just that it kept
going up. That our share of everything kept
getting bigger and bigger.
Definitely, to some extent,
we’ve been lucky. We talked about Japan.
I think China made a big mistake by
sticking to the dollar so long.
Europe should have delayed bringing
Greece into the Euro, because their
crisis wouldn’t have been so bad.
So we’ve been fortunate with blunders by
our opposition. We’ve done some good things.
But I think the thing Americans forget
is that we have been lucky a lot of
times. I worry our luck is wearing thin.
I quote a chess player—the great Bent Larsen,
who was number two to Bobby Fischer when
I was playing. He was asked, “Would you
rather be lucky or good in a chess game?”
And he said, “Both.” So I think Americans
forget. They know we’re good and we
are good. We’ve talked about dynamism,
this secret sauce that we’ve had so far. But
I think we’ve also been lucky. If you ran it
all again, it didn’t have to go the same way.
It’s a very scary kind of luck. If it’s so easy
for these other countries to make some mistake
that causes them to totally fall behind, it should
update you in favor of the idea that, in general,
it’s easy for a country to get itself in a rut.
It’s like the Fermi estimate thing. The fact
that you don’t see other alien civilizations
is actually very scary, because it suggests
that there’s some kind of filter which makes
it really hard to keep your civilization going.
I hope not, but we’ll see. It’s certainly
been amazing how the dollar’s
done and how the US has done.
I hope we continue, but we are doing a lot
of things right now… I don’t think Trump is
the cause of the dollar being in gentle
decline. That’s just wrong. I think it
would’ve happened with Harris winning.
But he is the president at the moment,
and things like Liberation Day… I’ve
talked to tech people who think it’s
just brilliant. I understand that. We can
debate it. I’m happy to debate it with them.
We look at the rule of law. Okay, I’m sitting at
Harvard University. Naturally it feels that way.
But also we talked about the president being
able to remove all the independent agencies.
It used to be that if you were a foreign
investor and you invested in the United States,
you thought you’d get your money back. Maybe the
stock would’ve gone down. Maybe the real estate
you bought would’ve gone down. But you’d get paid.
I think we were more exceptional than most about
that. That’s in doubt now. There’s no question.
The book’s about a lot of things besides
exorbitant privilege, the whole arc of the US.
But when I was telling people about the book, “I
don’t know, I’m looking at the numbers,
I’m looking at what China’s doing, I’m
reading about Europe and their central bank
digital currency. I think we’re going downhill.”
I showed it to academics, I showed it to financial
people, I showed it to tech people. They said,
“You’re nuts.” They didn’t want to think
about it. I don’t know if I’m right.
But I think it’s worth thinking about.
When I was in China, I met up with some
venture capitalists there and they were quite
depressed in general. Even founders say it’s
hard to raise money. I was asking them why, and
they said investors don’t want to invest because
even if you invest in the next Alibaba, who’s
to say the government doesn’t cancel the IPO?
They’re in trouble. Yeah. I think Europe has
a bright future in this context, of being the
team that doesn’t have as many injured players.
But yeah, China… it’s not going to be forever,
but I think for five or ten years
they’re going to stay in trouble.
Okay. Thank you so much for sitting down
with me and also answering all my questions.
I’m sure there are many misconceptions
and naive questions and so forth.
I appreciate your patience and
you educating me on this topic.
No, it’s an honor to be on your famous
podcast. I heard from so many young
people when I told them I was talking to you.
They were like, “You're with Dwarkesh? Just fly
back from here! Do whatever you need to do!”
So I’m glad you were able to come here.
It’s really been interesting, and I’m glad
to learn more about everything you’re doing.
The honor’s mine. It was great to be
able to travel here and speak with you.